feat: add stepping down post (#1)
mxinden/homepage: content/post/2024-02-29-stepping-down.md

---
date: 2024-02-29
title: Stepping down as a (rust-) libp2p maintainer
tags: [tech, libp2p]
---

I don't see myself making major contributions to (rust-) libp2p in the near future and thus I am stepping down as a maintainer.

As announced before, [I have left Protocol Labs in December 2023](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/discussions/5007).
After a 2 month re-orientation break, I have decided to move on entirely.

My first commit was 5y ago, [a small bug fix in our address handling](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/1204).
Since then lots happened. A couple of milestones I was involved in:

- First major contribution was an [implementation of S-Kademlia's disjoint paths](https://discuss.libp2p.io/t/s-kademlia-lookups-over-disjoint-paths-in-rust-libp2p/571).
  While a good first project, it was never deployed on any of the larger networks.
  Attacking a DHT is [not that hard](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.12212.pdf), making it secure takes a lot more than this.
- Eventually we added what one would expect every p2p library to have - support for hole punching.

>   This was a huge effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  That was a huge effort.
```

Sounds better IMO.

  We rolled our own relay implementation, a custom coordination protocol, various tricks around address discovery and mapping, ...
  Long story short, [we invented lots of new wheels](https://blog.ipfs.tech/2022-01-20-libp2p-hole-punching/) ...

>   Really, we should have started off of [ICE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_Connectivity_Establishment).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In hindsight, it might have been better to ...
  Really, we should have started off of [ICE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_Connectivity_Establishment).
```

You are saying "started off" which implies you wanted to modify it to fit your needs? Perhaps add a few more thoughts here on why you think that is and how would have liked to make it work.

- rust-libp2p was long missing a QUIC transport implementation.
  [Eventually](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/issues/2883) we were able to deliver this based on the quinn project, which I am very happy about, bringing lots of performance improvements to rust-libp2p users.

> - I managed the [specification and implementation of WebRTC in libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/issues/220). While a great match for a p2p library, unfortunately up until today, it has not seen larger adoption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I managed the [specification and implementation of WebRTC in libp2p](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/issues/220).
  While a great match for a p2p library, unfortunately up until today, it has not seen larger adoption.
```

Nit: You aren't following one-sentence-per-line strictly everywhere.

- A tiny fraction of IPFS today is powered by [a rust-libp2p based IPFS bootstrap node](https://blog.ipfs.tech/2023-rust-libp2p-based-ipfs-bootstrap-node/) handling ~35k connections on a medium-sized machine.
- A major portion of my time in 2023 went into an [automated performance setup for the many libp2p implementations](https://github.com/libp2p/test-plans/blob/master/perf/README.md).
  The outcome in my eyes is both [visually appealing](https://observablehq.com/@libp2p-workspace/performance-dashboard) and impactful from a performance perspective (see final item).
- We shipped many developer experience improvements, taming some of the complexity inherent to peer-to-peer networking e.g. the [`SwarmBuilder`](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/pull/4120).
- Security is hard, especially on the internet, doubly so when in a peer-to-peer setting.
  A lot of our work went into security fixes, especially around DOS attacks.
  See e.g. a [major memory exhaustion attack](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-libp2p/security/advisories/GHSA-jvgw-gccv-q5p8) and [a talk](https://max-inden.de/post/2022-11-02-dos-defense-dos-and-donts/) inspired by this work.

> - Talking about talks, I gave [quite a couple](https://max-inden.de/tags/talk/) on peer-to-peer networking and libp2p and helped organize related conferences, e.g. the FOSDEM networking devroom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Talking about talks, I gave [several](https://max-inden.de/tags/talk/) on peer-to-peer networking and libp2p as well as helped organize related conferences, e.g. the FOSDEM networking devroom.
```

Bit of repetition here.

- As a final big contribution, the before mentioned automated performance benchmark setup enabled me to land a major improvement to libp2p's bandwidth performance.
  Implementing [stream receive window auto-tuning in the Rust Yamux implementation](https://github.com/libp2p/rust-yamux/pull/176) improved throughput on high bandwidth connections from 33 Mbit/s to 1.3 Gbit/s.

During my time the rust-libp2p maintainer team went from 4 down to 1, up to 2, 3, back to 4, and now down to 1.

> I hope for another positive trend to follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope for the positive trend to continue.
```

Author: Oh, but the current trend is not positive. I.e. I hope for the number of maintainers to increase again.
